---
title: Waves
layout: article
category: coasts
---

Waves of any form---be it ocean waves, sound waves or seismic
waves---are a way of transferring energy from point A to point
B. There are two types of waves in the universe, electromagnetic
(e.g., light waves) and mechanical (e.g., sound waves). The waves
we're interested in, ocean waves, are a type of mechanical wave. This
means they have to travel through something (a _medium_) which, in the
case of ocean waves, is water.

Ocean waves (normally) form when the wind blows across an open body of
water, giving them the alternate title of _wind waves_ or _wind
generated waves_. We'll just call them ocean waves here though. They
travel along the surface of the water, at the _interface_ (a fancy
word for boundary) between the air and the water. Waves are important
for coastal systems because they're a method of moving energy, energy
which ultimately erodes and shapes coastlines. As a result,
understanding how they develop and how to describe them is super
helpful.

## Wave Generation

When the wind blows across the ocean, its speed varies with height
being slower near the surface of the ocean. This is because there is
friction acting between the water and the air. This friction produces
turbulence in the air near the surface of the water while also
transferring some of the air's kinetic energy into the water. The
transfer of energy into the water combined with the turbulence
produces perturbations in the surface of the water that eventually
become waves.

Initially these waves are small. How they grow is controlled by how
much energy the wind can transfer to them. The obvious control on this
is wind speed. Faster winds have more kinetic energy and can therefore
produce larger waves. Another control is the length of time the wind
blows for. The longer it blows for, the more energy can be transferred
into the water, producing stronger waves. A less obvious control on
the strength of generated waves is the _fetch_. This is the length of
water the wind has blown over. A longer fetch means the water's had
more opportunity to transfer kinetic energy and so we get stronger
waves.

The wind isn't the only way of generating ocean waves though. Anything
which disturbs the surface of the ocean has the potential to generate
waves. Cataclysmic events like earthquakes, submarine volcanic
eruptions or landslides generate immense waves known as
_tsunamis_[^1]. These don't look like[^2] the normal ocean waves we're
used to and have far more kinetic energy. Because of the infrequent
occurrence of these waves, we're not going to worry about them in this
topic. Just be aware that they are still a type of ocean wave.

## Describing Waves

As ocean waves are just another type of wave, they have a bunch of
properties that should be faimiliar to you if you've ever studied
basic Physics[^3].

<figure class="float-right-fig">
    <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/images/coasts/02-waves/wave-diagram.svg" alt="A simple diagram showing the terms used to describe a wave.">
<figcaption>
    A handy diagram pointing out the different properties of a wave.
</figcaption>
</figure>

The _crest_ and _trough_ of a wave are the highest and lowest points
of a wave respectively. If you imagined the surface of the water was
flat and overlayed a wave on top of it, the _amplitude_ of the wave
would be the height of the crest above the stationary water. Note that
a wave's amplitude is **not** the same thing as it's height. A _wave's
height_ is the vertical distance between a crest and a trough.

The _wavelength_ of a wave is the horizontal distance between two
crests or troughs. For wind generated ocean waves, it can vary from a
few tens of centimetres to hundreds of metres. The wavelength is
sometimes referred to using the lowercase Greek letter lambda
(&lambda;). This isn't too common in Geography but it's used all the
time in Physics.

The _time period_ of a wave (sometimes called the _wave period_) is
the time it takes for a wave to travel through one wavelength. That's
another way of saying it's the time between two crests or troughs
passing a stationary point. The time period is normally measured in
seconds.

The time period is linked to another property of a wave, its
_frequency_. The frequency is the number of crests or troughs passing
a stationary point per second. Mathematically, it's the inverse of the
time period or one divided by the time period. If the time period were
in seconds per wave (or just seconds), the frequency would be in waves
per second. For ocean waves, this is normally a small number so the
frequency is more commonly given in waves per minute.

Finally, the _velocity_ of a wave is the speed at which it moves in a
certain direction. For wind generated waves, the velocity has to be
less than the velocity of the wind, above it and the wind can't impart
energy anymore.

## Particle Motion in Waves

When we talk about the motion of waves, what we're really talking
about is the motion of particles as waves move through them. After
all, that's what we can see. The motion of particles is related to the
ratio of the wave's wavelength to the water's depth.

In water that is much deeper than the wavelength of the wave,
particles follow an _almost_ closed circular path. The radius of the
path depends on the wavelength of the wave and the depth of the
particle, decreasing with increasing depth. At a depth of around one
wavelength, the radius is so small the particles effectively don't
move. In water that isn't much deeper than the wavelength of the wave,
the particles follow an _almost_ closed elliptical path. This increase
in eccentricity happens because the sea bed starts to interfere with
the motion of the particles.

Now, notice that I said for both shallow and deep water waves, the
particles follow an _almost_ closed path. Those of you that paid
attention during Physics will remember that particles in a wave
oscillate around a central position, but they always return to the
same position once the wave has passed. In other words, there is no
net movement of particles. This **isn't** the case for ocean waves due
to a phenomenon called _Stokes Drift_. This is a complicated piece of
fluid mechanics that you don't need to understand. You just need to
know that it's responsible for water wave particles having non closed
paths that causes a net movement of particles in the direction of the
wave's propagation.

<figure>
    <img src="" alt="A diagram of particle motion in waves will go here.">
</figure>

## Waves & Coastlines

So far we've only talked about waves in the context of a deep ocean
but the place where we really see waves in action is near the
coast. Here, the water gets shallower, the waves get bigger and some
of that energy the waves have been carrying finally makes it to the
land.

On the run-up to a coastline, the depth of the water becomes shallower
and a wave is forced to slow down. As it slows, its wavelength
decreases and its height increases[^wave-shoaling]. This entire
process is called _shoaling_. The wave's height can only increase so
far however. Above a height of around one seventh the wavelength of
the wave[^wave-breaking-factor], the wave becomes unstable and it
_breaks_.

Depending on the properties of the wave, when it breaks on a coastline
it can be classified as either _constructive_ or _destructive_ (also
referred to as _surging_ or _surfing_). They differ in the strength of
their _swash_ (rush of water up a beach) and _backwash_ (rush of water
down a beach).

_Constructive_ waves have a long period, a long wavelength and a low
amplitude. When they break on a beach, they have a strong swash and a
weak backwash. This means they deposit more material on a beach than
they remove. Over time, they build up gentle beaches. The repeated
action of pushing material up a beach eventually leads to the
development of _berms_.

<figure>
    <img src="" alt="A diagram of a constructive wave will go here.">
</figure>

_Destructive_ waves have a short period, short wavelength and a high
amplitude. They tend to be steep and form during storms. When they
break on a beach, they have a weak swash but powerful backwash. As a
result, they remove material from a beach and produce a steep beach
with _break point bars_. In particularly stormy weather, destructive
waves can be powerful enough to throw material to the back of a beach
producing a _storm beach_---a ridge of coarse material.

<figure>
    <img src="" alt="A diagram of a destructive wave will go here.">
</figure>

[^1]: Don't ever, ever, ever, call these tidal waves. Never. I'm serious. Don't you dare. They've got **nothing** to do with the tides.

[^2]: In the open ocean, they have wavelengths in the hundreds of kilometres range while their amplitude is only a few tens of centimetres. They're barely noticeable. It's when they get to shallower water that they grow in size. 

[^3]: You have.

[^wave-shoaling]: This is again because of some complicated fluid mechanics. In shallow water, the [group velocity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_velocity) of a wave is proportional to the square root of the water's depth. As the depth decreases, the group velocity decreases but the wave's frequency remains constant. To ensure a constant energy flux, the wave's wavelength must decrease which in turn means its height must increase.

[^wave-breaking-factor]: I've seen some places say breaking occurs at one eighth the wave's wavelength. 
